Jacob Fowles, CRMDA, SPA
Paul Johnson, CRMDA, POLS
2015-11-13

GRA Training Assignment #4

This assignment involves the Integrated Postsecondary Education
Database (IPEDS). IPEDS is the federal clearinghouse for higher
education data. We want you to write a program that a) downloads b)
unpacks c) imports and d) summarizes one of the IPEDS survey
series. We want you to get the Finance data for private and public
universities and measure each university’s revenue that comes from
state sources. We want to download data for fiscal years 2002-2013.


In order to figure out the address of the files to download, it is
necessary to browse the Website.

1. https://nces.ed.gov/ipeds/datacenter

2. Click “Download Survey Data Files”, Choose the "Continue" button

3. Start with “2002” and “Finance”, then "Continue"

4. The  “Private not-for-profit institutions or Public institutions
using FASB”.

As you do that, you'll find that there are zip files to choose.  We
leave it up to you to decide which data type is most easily downloaded
and put to use in your program of choice. 


Write a program that handles these challenges:

1. Download. We don't want you to point-and-click on the files. Write
a function that downloads the zip files for the 2002 – 2013. Save them
in a single folder. (Hint: the files and directories for all years
have a similar naming structure).

2. Unzip each file.  In some zip files, there will be an original
data file along with a corrected version suffixed "_rv". In that case,
we want to keep the “_rv” file and discard the other.

3. Import the data files. (It seems likely to us that this will
be easier if you use the example command files that are provided
for SAS or Stata users.)

4. Create a new variable corresponding to the fiscal year of the
survey

5. You should only keep four variables:

   unitid (the unique identifier for each university),

   the year variable you created above,

   f2d16 (total university revenue), and

   f2d03 (state revenue)

5. Append (stack) all of the datasets into long form, so you have one
dataset that combines all years from 2002 - 2013

6. The total revenue and state revenue are in nominal
dollars. ("nominal" means "face value", not "adjusted for inflation").
Create new variables that transform the revenue variables into real
dollars using the annualized Consumer Price Index (CPI-U).  In the
data folder of this problem, you should find a CSV file that has 2
columns, the years and the CPI values.

The CPI values are used as divisors, as in

"real value" = "nominal value" / "CPI-U"

to deflate numbers to a common scale. 

7. Create a new variable that represents the percent of university
revenue derived from state sources.

8. Give all variables “pretty” names.  For your new dataset, create a
codebook. For your codebook, include a summary table that includes
means, standard deviations, minimum and maximum. These should be
provided for the entire data set as well as for the individual years.

9. Save your new dataset



